Title: Certified Human Trajectory Prediction

URL Source: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2025/papers/Bahari_Certified_Human_Trajectory_Prediction_CVPR_2025_paper.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 19 May 2025 12:12:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Certified Human Trajectory Prediction 

# Mohammadhossein Bahari ∗,1 Saeed Saadatnejad ∗,1 Amirhossein Askari Farsangi 1

# Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli †,2 Alexandre Alahi 11EPFL 2Apple 

{mohammadhossein.bahari, saeed.saadatnejad}@epfl.ch 

# Abstract 

Predicting human trajectories is essential for the safe oper-ation of autonomous vehicles, yet current data-driven mod-els often lack robustness in case of noisy inputs such as adversarial examples or imperfect observations. Although some trajectory prediction methods have been developed to provide empirical robustness, these methods are heuristic and do not offer guaranteed robustness. In this work, we propose a certification approach tailored for trajectory pre-diction that provides guaranteed robustness. To this end, we address the unique challenges associated with trajectory prediction, such as unbounded outputs and multi-modality. To mitigate the inherent performance drop through certi-fication, we propose a diffusion-based trajectory denoiser and integrate it into our method. Moreover, we introduce new certified performance metrics to reliably measure the trajectory prediction performance. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate the accuracy and robustness of the certified predictors and highlight their advantages over the non-certified ones. The code is available online: https://s-attack.github.io/ 

# 1. Introduction 

Predicting the behavior of humans is a crucial task for the safe operation of autonomous vehicles and robots. The task, known as human trajectory prediction, aims to pre-dict the future positions of humans given their past posi-tions. It has received significant attention in recent years, with data-driven methods demonstrating remarkable perfor-mance [24, 50, 59]. Such progress prompts a critical ques-tion: Are these methods reliable enough for real-world ap-plications with noisy inputs? Notably, it has been shown that these methods are susceptible to adversarial attacks, raising significant concerns regarding their robustness and   

> ∗Equal contribution.
> †Work done while at Imperial College London. Observation Noisy observation Prediction Certified bounds

Figure 1. Illustration of the influence of noisy inputs on trajec-tory prediction models. The red trajectories depict clean obser-vations and the corresponding predictions, while the gray trajecto-ries show noisy observations along with their resulting predictions. The top part showcases the outputs of a standard trajectory predic-tion model, revealing unbounded predictions with noisy inputs. In contrast, the bottom part demonstrates the outputs of our trajec-tory predictor with guaranteed robustness. The model provides certified bounds (blue boxes) on the predicted outputs, ensuring that outputs remain within guaranteed regions despite input noise. 

security [11, 48, 54]. Moreover, recent findings indicate that in real-world autonomous driving pipelines, inputs of the prediction models are imperfect, resulting in performance drops [60]. This noise stems from upstream modules in the perception pipeline, such as detection and tracking. There-fore, it is crucial to study the robustness properties of tra-jectory predictors. Previous works proposed heuristic approaches to im-prove the empirical robustness of the trajectory prediction models [12, 32, 66]. However, it has been shown that such heuristic approaches are ultimately ineffective against suf-ficiently powerful adversaries [2, 13, 55]. Therefore, it is essential to study certification techniques that provide guar-anteed robustness i.e., to guarantee that given any confined input noise, the models’ outputs fall within certified bounds. Given the black-box nature of the prediction models, the This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation. Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version; the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore. 12301 bounds on the outputs also deliver reliability to the system which is crucial for autonomous vehicles. We illustrate in Figure 1 that even slight perturbations in observation in-puts considerably changes model’s predictions. Neverthe-less, predictions from a model with guaranteed robustness invariably stay within its certified bounds. In this work, we propose a certification method for tra-jectory prediction based on “Randomized Smoothing” [18]. In principle, randomized smoothing transforms a base model into a smoothed model by adding random perturba-tions to the input, and then aggregating the outputs. Up to our knowledge, we are the first to study this in trajec-tory prediction, encountering various challenges: (1) How can we transform the randomized smoothing technique widely applied in image classification to the multi-output regression task of trajectory prediction? Moreover, it is a time-series regression task that does not inherently have a maximum output range, which is essential for randomized smoothing. How can we define a range for the outputs? (2) While randomized smoothing is known to hurt perfor-mance in classification [18], to what extent does it hurt the accuracy of trajectory predictors? Is there a way to main-tain the accuracy? (3) Finally, trajectory predictors are of-ten multi-modal, generating multiple output modes. How can these multi-modal outputs be accommodated in the cer-tification process? In order to address the aforementioned challenges, (1) we adapt two randomized smoothing ap-proaches based on mean [18] and median [17] aggregation functions to trajectory prediction and compare their perfor-mances. We also propose an adaptive clamping strategy to pose maximum output ranges. (2) To mitigate the perfor-mance degradation resulting from randomized smoothing, we propose a denoiser as a pre-processor suppressing the noise before feeding to the smoothed model. Given the success of diffusion models, we design an unconditional diffusion-based denoiser tailored for trajectory data. (3) Fi-nally, we address the multi-modality challenge by propos-ing a new certification definition that can accommodate multi-modal outputs. We conduct experiments employing state-of-the-art tra-jectory prediction models trained on Trajnet++ bench-mark [34]. We develop smoothed trajectory prediction models with guaranteed robustness and demonstrate both their accuracy and the certified bounds of their predictions. The results highlight the advantages of the smoothed mod-els over non-certified models in noisy input settings. They also indicate that the most accurate models are not neces-sarily the most robust. In addition, we show that common performance metrics for the trajectory prediction task are unreliable as they cannot account for the potential input noises. To address this, we introduce new certified metrics, equipped with the certified bounds. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We are the first to introduce certification to the trajectory prediction task, providing guaranteed robustness for mod-els against adversarial attacks and imperfect inputs. • We develop a randomized smoothed trajectory predictor tailored to the unique challenges of the task and propose an unconditional diffusion denoiser to enhance the per-formance. • We introduce new certified performance metrics and through comprehensive experiments, demonstrate the ac-curacy and robustness of the smoothed models and high-light their advantages over non-certified models. 

# 2. Related Works 

Human trajectory prediction. In recent years, as au-tonomous driving systems and social robots have become more popular, the challenge of predicting human trajecto-ries has caught much attention. The majority of the re-search revolves around enhancing accuracy by learning the interaction dynamics between humans more effectively. To this end, Social-LSTM [1] is the pioneering work employ-ing neural networks. Subsequent studies propose different architectural solutions based on Convolutional Neural Net-works [44, 63], Graph Neural Networks [9, 43], and Trans-formers [22, 25, 36, 50]. Additional approaches have incor-porated the domain knowledge [35, 39], developed equiv-arient feature learning [24, 59] and explored various strate-gies for pooling social features [5, 31, 34]. 

Robustness for trajectory prediction. The vulnerability of trajectory predictors to adversarial attacks has been shown in several previous works [11, 48, 54]. To address this vul-nerability, others proposed robustness defenses based on various heuristic approaches [4, 12, 32, 66]. However, none of these approaches are guaranteed robustness methods. Re-cently, Trajpac [65] proposed a verification approach for the robustness of trajectory predictors. They employ a probably approximately correct (PAC) strategy by approximating the prediction model locally with a linear model and use it as a proxy to determine the robustness of the model. How-ever, their method has some limitations: (1) Their method is not agnostic to the input noise distribution due to the de-pendency of learned linear model on the noise distribution fed during learning. (2) Their method is inefficient in the number of required samples, with experiments often neces-sitating over 30 , 000 random samples. (3) Their method is probabilistic, and does not provide a guaranteed robustness. In this work, we employ a randomized smoothing approach that provides a certified bound, requires significantly fewer samples, and generalizes to any noise distribution encoun-tered during deployment. 

Randomized smoothing certification. Certification is to guarantee that a model’s outputs are within a bound around its initial output once the model’s inputs are within a neigh-borhood of its initial input and is mainly used as a defense 12302 against adversarial attacks. Various certification and ver-ification methods have been proposed based on Satisfia-bility Modulo theories [20, 29], mixed integer linear pro-gramming [7, 21], solving optimization problems [19, 58] and layer by layer outer approximation of activations [53]. However, these methods are computationally expensive and cannot scale to common neural networks. Alternatively, randomized smoothing has been proposed as an efficient and model-agnostic approach and has achieved great suc-cess in the classification task [10, 14, 38]. More impor-tantly, it imposes the least assumptions on the noise distri-bution, providing robustness against any confined noise. In randomized smoothing, the smoothed prediction for a given input is calculated by sampling some points around that in-put and aggregating their corresponding outputs. Cohen et al. [18] proved certified bounds for the smoothed pre-dictors with a mean aggregator, particularly for the clas-sification task. Moreover, it was shown that integrating a denoiser into a smoothed predictor can greatly enhance both accuracy and certified bounds [51]. Recently, random-ized smoothing certification has been adapted for the de-tection task [17]. It introduces a median smoothing aggre-gator which is more appropriate for regression tasks. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first randomized smoothing certification for the trajectory prediction prob-lem, studying both mean and median smoothing. Randomized smoothing is distinct from other meth-ods that guarantee models’ output such as conformal pre-diction [52] as conformal prediction provides the guar-antee of ground truth coverage rather than the guaran-tee of the output region. Moreover, unlike randomized smoothing, conformal prediction is dependent on the input noise distribution (calibration set). Randomized smooth-ing is also different from uncertainty quantification ap-proaches [30] and they serve distinct yet complementary purposes. Uncertainty estimation quantifies the model’s un-certainty (aleatoric or epistemic) for a given input, while randomized smoothing transforms the original model’s out-puts into a new output with bounds through smoothing. 

Denoising diffusion. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models [28] have achieved great success in image gener-ation [23, 33, 47, 64], human pose prediction [49], GPS tra-jectory generation [67] and even trajectory prediction [3, 26, 42, 56]. However, the application of these models as denois-ers remains largely underexplored with only a few studies investigating their use as denoisers in other domains such as image restoration [61, 68]. In training a diffusion model, Gaussian noise is progressively added to the input during the forward process. The model is then trained to reverse this process, recovering the input over several steps. This makes the diffusion model particularly suitable for denois-ing tasks on any noisy signal. We are the first to propose an unconditional diffusion-based denoiser for trajectory data and integrate it into our randomized smoothed predictor. 

# 3. Method 

In this section, we first explain the certification framework backgrounds and then describe our certification for the tra-jectory prediction task. 

## 3.1. Certification 

Randomized smoothing [18] is a technique initially intro-duced for certifying the robustness of models against ℓ2-norm adversarial attacks in image classification. Given a prediction function f , randomized smoothing aims to bound the output of a smoothed function ˜f = A(f ) where 

A is an aggregation/smoothing operator. This bound is valid for a radius in the neighborhood of the input, named certifi-cation radius R.We consider two choices for the smoothing operator: mean [18] and median [17] smoothing. 

Mean smoothing. Given a function f : Rd → [l, u ], input 

X ∈ Rd, and input certification radius R, mean smooth-ing computes the expected value of the predictor over a perturbed input, that is ˜f (X) = Eϵ[f (X + ϵ)] , where 

ϵ ∼ N  0, σ 2I. It has been shown that given ∥r∥2 < R ,the output of ˜f can be bounded as: 

l + ( u − l) · Φ

 η(X) − Rσ



≤ ˜f (X + r),

˜f (X + r) ≤ l + ( u − l) · Φ

 η(X) + Rσ



,

(1) where η(X) = σ · Φ−1

 ˜f (X)−lu−l



and Φ is the cumulative distribution function of the standard Gaussian. We refer to the lower and upper certified bounds as LB and UB, respec-tively. Trajectory predictors are commonly multi-output f :

Rd → [l1, u 1] × [l2, u 2] × · · · × [lm, u m], where f (X) = (f1(X), . . . , f m(X)) . In this case, the certification bounds are applicable individually to each coordinate. We will ex-plain the estimation process for li’s and ui’s in Section 3.2. Note that this smoothing method is applicable to func-tions with initial lower and upper bounds. However, for functions that inherently lack those, an alternative option is to use median smoothing. 

Median smoothing. Given a continuous function f :

Rd → Rm, and an input certification radius R, median smoothing aims to find a bound for the median of pre-dictions, as given by ˜f (X) = q0.5(X), where qp(X) = sup {y ∈ R | P[f (X + ϵ) ≤ y] ≤ p} is the quantile function with q0.5 indicating the median and ϵ ∼ N (0 , σ 2I). Then, 12303 Figure 2. An outline of the proposed smoothed trajectory predictor: n different randomized input observations Xi are created by adding perturbation ϵ to the input X. The denoiser h processes these samples Xi, which are then fed into the trajectory predictor g to make the outputs Y i. Applying an aggregation function A (median or mean) on Y i, the final smoothed prediction Y is derived. 

the certified bounds for ∥r∥2 ≤ R are as follows: 

qΦ(− Rσ )(X) ≤ ˜f (X + r) ≤ qΦ( Rσ )(X). (2) Similar to the mean smoothing, we refer to the lower and upper certified bounds as LB and UB, respectively. In simple words, with certification, we ensure that if an input to the smoothed predictor is perturbed within a radius R, the output remains within a certified range. Note that, while R is a parameter determined by the appli-cation’s requirements, σ serves as a hyperparameter. As we will see later, σ can be adjusted to balance between per-formance and the tightness of bounds. For instance, when 

σ = 0 , the output aligns closely with the original predic-tor, and it yields trivial bounds l ≤ ˜f ≤ u. As σ increases, the influence of the perturbation becomes more pronounced, causing the certified bounds to tighten, albeit with more smoothed/less accurate predictions. We will analyze the ef-fect of σ in Section 4. 

## 3.2. Certified Trajectory Prediction 

Human trajectory prediction tackles a regression task with sequences as inputs and outputs. The position of an agent at any timestep t is represented by its xy-coordinates (xt, y t).Given an observation sequence for Tobs timesteps as X =(x−Tobs +1 , y −Tobs +1 , . . . , x 0, y 0), the model predicts the next Tpred positions Y = g(X) = ( x1, y 1, . . . , x Tpred , y Tpred ),aiming to be close to the ground-truth ˆY . Notably, the tra-jectory predictor g can be construed as a function mapping 

R2Tobs → R2Tpred , making it suitable for certification pur-poses with d = 2 Tobs and m = 2 Tpred .Figure 2 provides an overview of our approach. Initially, we acquire n Monte-Carlo samples from ϵ ∼ N (0 , σ 2I),adding them to input X to get X1, · · · , X n. They are then processed by our denoiser h. The certified bounds for ˜f (X) = A(g(h(X + ϵ))) are then computed according to Equation (1) and Equation (2) . Note that A represents    

> Note that while ϵhas a Gaussian distribution, bounds are valid for any noise distribution within radius R.

the aggregation function (either median or mean) applied to 

Y 1, · · · , Y n to yield the final smoothed prediction Y . In the followings, we explain the details of the method, and defer the full algorithm to the supplementary. 

Diffusion denoiser. The denoised smoothing technique combines a classifier with a denoiser, by first passing per-turbed inputs through the denoiser to pre-process them be-fore being fed into the model [51]. Extending this technique to trajectory prediction, we combine the predictor g with h,making f (X) = g(h(X)) . The denoiser suppresses the noise before feeding the data to the predictor, resulting in tighter certified bounds for the composed model f . In an optimal scenario, where the denoiser exhibits high efficacy (h(X +ϵ) ≈ X), we obtain pseudo-clean data for g, leading to prediction performance closely resembling that of origi-nal data. When the denoiser is absent, we put h = id and the certification is hold for f (X) = g(X). We propose a simple autoencoder for h designed to unconditionally de-noise the input. This model is trained independently from the predictor through multiple steps of a denoising diffusion process, enabling it to learn the distribution of trajectory data. At inference time, the diffusion process is repeated for the required number of steps in order to denoise the in-put trajectory. We explain more our diffusion model in the supplementary. 

Adaptive clamping. As mentioned in Section 3.1, to es-tablish certified bounds in case of mean aggregation for the multi-output human trajectory predictor with m = 2 Tpred 

outputs, one needs to compute lj ’s and uj ’s. However, the output of trajectory predictors inherently lacks bounds due to the unrestricted nature of the predicted positions. To ad-dress this for our certification equations, we propose adap-tive clamping. The process involves computing the predic-tions given all X in the training dataset. By determining the maximum and minimum values from these computations, we establish lj = min X fj (X) and uj = max X fj (X) for each coordinate j. However, these bounds are not guaran-teed. In other words, with new samples, the predictor may predict outside these estimated bounds. Therefore, we can-12304 not derive the certified bounds using the previous equations. To address this, all coordinates of the predicted trajectories, 

fj (X)’s, are clamped with min( uj , max( lj , . )) operator to ensure conformity within the specified range. Note that one advantage of median smoothing is that the initial bounds are not required. 

Certified metrics. The smoothed predictor generates a predicted trajectory with a certified bound around each pre-dicted timestep. In order to assess them, we introduce the following metrics: • Average / Final Bound half-Diameter (ABD/FBD) :ABD measures the distance of the farthest points within the bound from the predicted trajectory, averaged over all timesteps, and FBD measures this distance at the final timestep as: FBD = 12 [( UB 2Tpred −1−LB 2Tpred −1)2 +(UB 2Tpred − LB 2Tpred )2]0.5.

(3) • Certified-ADE / Certified-FDE: The common Average/-Final Displacement Error (ADE/FDE) metrics are typ-ically reported under the assumption of perfect inputs. However, in practical scenarios, various types of input noise can occur, which can significantly alter the perfor-mance of predictors. To address this gap, we propose these metrics that measure the highest ADE/FDE happen-ing given noisy inputs. Specifically, they measure the dis-tance of the farthest point inside the bounds to the ground-truth trajectory. • Certified Collision Rate (Certified-Col): Collision rate has been previously introduced as a metric that quantifies the percentage of collisions between the predicted trajec-tory of an agent and the ground-truth trajectories of neigh-boring agents in the scene [34]. We introduce this metric as the percentage of examples in which at least one neigh-boring agent lies within the calculated certified bounds of the predicted trajectory. 

Multi-modality. Unlike the classification task, the tra-jectory prediction is a multi-modal task i.e., given an input trajectory, multiple plausible trajectories can be predicted as output. Nonetheless, it poses a unique challenge for cer-tification in multi-modal predictors generating k modes on which mode to consider. To address this, we reformulate it into multi-output mapping R2Tobs → Rk×2Tpred , and lever-age the fact that each mode captures a specific behavior. Consequently, we certify all k modes and choose the best mode based on the minimum of the Certified-FDE among all modes. The corresponding metrics are then computed for the selected mode. 

# 4. Experiments 

Datasets: ETH [45], UCY [37], and WildTrack [15] are well-established datasets containing annotations of human positions in crowded environments. We utilize the Tra-jnet++ [34] benchmark, which provides a fixed data split and unified pre-processing for these datasets. We used the common input and output lengths of Tobs = 9 and 

Tpred = 12 .

Baselines: Up to our knowledge, our work is the first to introduce certification for trajectory prediction. There-fore, we conduct a comparative analysis between the mean and median smoothed predictors, representing the two cer-tification techniques introduced. In order to obtain the smoothed predictors, we transform multiple existing trajec-tory predictors into smoothed models. We employ multiple state-of-the-art learning-based trajectory predictors, namely Directional-Pooling (D-Pool) [34], AutoBot [24], and Eq-Motion [59]. Moreover, we include Social-Force [27] as a rule-based trajectory predictor. 

Metrics: We report the performances in terms of the Av-erage / Final Displacement Error (ADE / FDE) between the model predictions and its ground-truth values, along with FBD, Certified-FDE, and Certified-Col, introduced in Sec-tion 3. The reported values are in meters and percentages. For the sake of space, we leave the results on ABD and Certified-ADE for the supplementary. 

Implementation details: Throughout the experiments, the number of Monte-Carlo samples n is set to 100 , R to 

0.1, and σ range to 0.08 − 0.4. Note that since σ serves as a hyperparameter, this range has been experimentally se-lected to ensure the models perform effectively. 

## 4.1. Results 

We initially report the performance of the predictors and their smoothed counterparts utilizing the median aggrega-tion function in the left part of Figure 3. The figure shows the accuracy of models against the certified bounds, high-lighting their accuracy with respect to robustness. Each point on the curves represents an instance of a smoothed predictor with a different hyperparameter σ. Therefore, changing σ allows selecting a model instance with the de-sired trade off between accuracy and robustness. While the original models (dashed lines in the figure) lack guar-antees, the smoothed predictors provide certified bounds, albeit at the expense of a modest increase in FDE (ranging from 1% to 6% for different predictors with the smallest 

σ). The figure also provides a way to compare the guaran-teed robustness of different predictors. Given an FDE value, predictors with a smaller bound ( i.e., smaller FBD) have better guaranteed robustness. The figures show that while smoothed EqMotion and smoothed Autobot have similar bounds, smoothed D-Pool has a smaller bound for FDEs be-low 1.25 . Moreover, smoothed Social-Force has the largest bounds due to its significant sensitivity to input perturba-tions. In the right part of Figure 3, we show similar curves but 12305 Social-Force Social-Force D-Pool D-Pool AutoBot AutoBot EqMotion EqMotion Social-Force Social-Force D-Pool D-Pool AutoBot AutoBot EqMotion EqMotion Figure 3. FDE against FBD for median aggregation on the left and mean aggregation on the right. The results are for different smoothed predictors with two aggregation functions and equally spaced σ within [0 .08 , 0.4] . The bottom left indicates the best performance. The figures show a trade-off between accuracy (represented in FDE) and robustness (represented as FBD). They also provide a comparison between models’ guaranteed robustness. 

using the mean aggregation function. Comparing the two sub-figures reveals that the median aggregator yields con-siderably smaller bounds compared to the mean aggrega-tor, demonstrating the better alignment of the median with the trajectory prediction task. This is probably because tra-jectory predictors are sensitive to input noise, leading to diverse outputs. Consequently, mean aggregation is more susceptible to outliers, whereas the median is less affected. Therefore, for our subsequent experiments, we opt for me-dian aggregation. Moreover, we have selected EqMotion as our main predictor due its superior performance. In the rest of this section, we report experimental results to answer the remaining research questions. 

Is there a trade-off between accuracy and certified bound? As shown by Figure 3, by increasing σ, the bounds progressively tighten while the accuracy drops, indicating a trade-off between them (see Equations (1) and (2)). Note that the hyperparameter σ allows users to tailor the certified bound according to their needs. For instance, given a de-sired FBD of 0.72 , we can choose σ = 0 .28 for smoothed EqMotion. 

Does the most accurate model have the best guaran-teed robustness? We report the performance of models with both certified and non-certified metrics in Table 1. It shows that there is a large gap between FDE and Certified-FDE for all models, revealing models’ lack of robustness. This shows the danger of solely relying on non-certified metrics. This analysis also uncovers a noteworthy obser-vation: the model with the minimal FDE (EqMotion) is not the same as the model achieving the lowest Certified-FDE (D-Pool), indicating that a more accurate model is not necessarily more robust. It similarly shows a large gap be-tween Col and Certified-Col for all models. As expected, Social-Force has the lowest collision rate due to its im-posed collision-avoidance rules. However, the gap between Col and Certified-Col shows the model’s sensitivity to input noise. 

What practical advantages does the smoothed predictor offer compared to the original model? To study this ques-tion, we examine the robustness of the models in two sce-narios: adversarial attacks and real-world perception noise. We first investigate the robustness of the models against adversarial attacks by performing PGD attacks [40]. We demonstrate a scenario in Figure 4 where the left figure shows the existence of an adversarially perturbed input for the original model, leading to large deviations from the orig-inal prediction (more than 2m). However, conducting PGD attacks on the smoothed predictor (the right figure) does not lead to predictions outside the certified bounds, demonstrat-ing its guaranteed robustness. We provide a detailed quan-titative analysis in the supplementary. In order to illustrate the impact of imperfect input data (i.e., noisy inputs) coming from perception systems on the predictors, we employ an off-the-shelf joint detection and tracking model [62] to extract observation trajectories on the nuScenes dataset [8]. Figure 4 visualizes a real-world scenario with both the extracted imperfect observation se-quence and the ground-truth. On the left, we observe that the imperfect observation influences the prediction of the model, leading to a large deviation from the prediction given ground-truth observation. This clearly shows that the performance of the model is sensitive to the input noise, 12306 Figure 4. Comparing the performance of the original (on the left) and the smoothed predictor (on the right). The original predictor’s outputs change drastically with adversarial and imperfect inputs. In contrast, the smoothed predictor consistently predicts within the bounds, demonstrating higher reliability. For easier comparison, the final predicted points of the original predictor for the adversarial and imperfect observations are marked on the right figure with gray and blue stars, respectively. 

Model FDE Certified-FDE Col Certified-Col Social-Force [27] 1.25 N/A 7.4 N/A Smoothed Social-Force 1.26 2.27 8.0 46 D-Pool [34] 1.14 N/A 9.4 N/A Smoothed D-Pool 1.23 2.0 9.0 49 AutoBot [24] 1.14 N/A 8.8 N/A Smoothed AutoBot 1.17 2.05 9.3 53 EqMotion [59] 1.12 N/A 10.1 N/A Smoothed EqMotion 1.14 2.07 10.6 57 

> Table 1. Comparing performances in terms of certified and non-certified metrics. Since non-smoothed models do not have any guarantee on their outputs, the certified metrics are not applicable (N/A) for them.

making the model unreliable for safety-critical applications. In contrast, on the right, the predictions of the smoothed predictor for both observation sequences remain within the certified bounds, providing a reliable model. 

## 4.2. Discussions 

Denoiser analysis. Our proposed trajectory denoiser acts as a pre-processing module and therefore, incorporating it in the smoothing operation improves the certified bounds. In this part, we first compare the performance of different denoisers for trajectory denoising without considering the predictors. To this end, we measure the magnitude of the remaining noise in their outputs when provided with noisy input trajectories at different levels. In Table 2, we report the performance of our proposed diffusion denoiser along with three established denoising methods for time-series data: the Wiener filter [57] as a statistical approach, a Mov-ing Average filter [46] to filter high-frequency noise, and fitting a 4 th order polynomial that has been used previously to represent human trajectories [6]. The results demonstrate that the diffusion denoiser outperforms other approaches in noise reduction. Second, we evaluate the effect of the de-noiser in the certified bounds of our smoothed predictor and                     

> Model Noise = 0.08 0.24 0.40 No denoiser 0.08 0.24 0.40 Polynomial 0.08 0.22 0.36 Moving Average 0.07 0.18 0.29 Wiener Filter 0.06 0.16 0.26 Diffusion Denoiser (ours) 0.06 0.14 0.24 Table 2. Performance comparison of different denoisers. Noisy trajectories at three noise levels are fed to denoisers, and the re-maining noise magnitude is reported.

compare it with not having a denoiser (assigning h = id )in Table 3. For similar FDE values, the smoothed predictor with diffusion denoiser has a significantly smaller certified bound, demonstrating the effectiveness of the denoiser in tightening the bounds. 

Multi-modal settings. To analyze certification in multi-modal settings, we employed the multi-modal EqMotion with k = 20 [59]. We report the multi-modal metrics de-fined in Section 3.2 in Table 4. The multi-modal model is more accurate than its single-modal counterpart in terms of both FDE and Certified-FDE, as it captures diverse output 12307 Model FDE = 1.2 1.3 1.4 W/o denoiser 1.20 0.96 0.80 W/ denoiser 0.78 0.65 0.57 Table 3. Comparing FBD of the smoothed predictor with and with-out the denoiser across different FDE values. Model FDE FBD Certified-FDE Single-modal 1.13 0.99 2.07 Multi-modal 0.39 0.64 1.38 Table 4. Comparison of single- vs. multi-modal settings for Smoothed EqMotion. Model FDE FBD Single-agent 1.13 0.99 Multi-agent 1.13 1.21 Table 5. Comparison of certified bounds in single- vs. multi-agent 

> settings in similar FDE values.

modes. Moreover, it has a smaller FBD since each mode concentrates on a specific behavior, leading to a smaller cer-tified bound. 

Multi-agent settings. In the real world, the observed tra-jectories of all agents can be noisy. Our method can be extended to this setting, where instead of perturbing the tra-jectory of one agent, we consider perturbations added to all agents in the scene. Section 4.2 shows that with a similar FDE, the multi-agent model has a larger bound. Basically, when perturbing all agents, the interdependencies between agents make prediction change more, leading to larger cer-tified bounds. 

Downstream task. We also investigated whether improv-ing trajectory prediction with the diffusion denoiser can en-hance performance in a downstream task. We considered the task of robot navigation in a dense crowd scenario em-ploying a crowd navigation simulator [16], where the objec-tive for the robot is to navigate through a group of simulated pedestrians and reach a destination. At each timestep, the robot predicts the interactions, and determines its next ac-tion. We generated a dataset of 5,000 simulation episodes using the pre-trained SARL policy as the expert, and sub-sequently trained an imitation model on this data for 200 epochs [16]. We adhered to their protocol, which measures the effectiveness of a policy using the collision rate, and ac-cumulated reward. The results, summarized in Table 6, indicate that the learned policy is sensitive to input noise, which could be introduced in real-world scenarios. However, when our dif-fusion denoiser is incorporated, there is a consistent im-              

> Method Noise size Reward ↑Collision (%) ↓
> Original 00.272 13.1 Original 0.2 0.230 21.0 Robust 0.2 0.263 15.1 Table 6. Quantitative results of crowd robot navigation [16] with different prediction methods.

provement in accumulated reward and a reduction in colli-sion rate. This is due to the improved interaction prediction, resulting in better planning for the robot. 

## 4.3. Limitations 

Randomized smoothing inevitably increases computational costs in order to provide guaranteed robustness. This is due to the fact that it requires evaluating the predictor n times to obtain Monte-Carlo samples. Nonetheless, this process can be parallelized. Using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090, the evaluation time for predicting a trajectory of 4.8 seconds length in EqMotion is 0.07 seconds, while for smoothed EqMotion with n = 100 , it is 0.1 seconds which is small enough for many real-world applications (only about 42% 

increase in the computational time). As future work, one can improve it e.g., by better sampling strategies or opti-mized code structures. 

# 5. Conclusions 

In this work, we introduced a certified trajectory prediction approach that tackles the issue of lacking guaranteed robust-ness in the human trajectory prediction task. We also pro-posed a denoiser for trajectory data and introduced new cer-tified metrics that ensure reliable performance assessments under noisy conditions. Throughout extensive experiments on various trajectory predictors, we found that the model with the highest accuracy is not always the most robust one. By adjusting certification parameters, one can prioritize ei-ther a tighter certified bound or higher accuracy. Moreover, our experiments demonstrated the edge of smoothed pre-dictors over standard models in the presence of adversarial perturbations or input noise. We hope our work paves the way for more reliable trajectory predictors. 

# Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank Brian Sifringer, Taylor Mordan, Ahmad Rahimi, and Yuejiang Liu for their help-ful comments. This project was partially funded by Honda R&D Co., Ltd. 12308 References 

[1] Alexandre Alahi, Kratarth Goel, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alexandre Robicquet, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. So-cial lstm: Human trajectory prediction in crowded spaces. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016. 2 [2] Anish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, and David Wagner. Obfus-cated gradients give a false sense of security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial examples. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning (ICML) . PMLR, 2018. 1 [3] Inhwan Bae, Young-Jae Park, and Hae-Gon Jeon. Singu-lartrajectory: Universal trajectory predictor using diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. 3 [4] Mohammadhossein Bahari, Saeed Saadatnejad, Ahmad Rahimi, Mohammad Shaverdikondori, Amir-Hossein Shahidzadeh, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Alexandre Alahi. Vehicle trajectory prediction works, but not everywhere. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 2 [5] Federico Bartoli, Giuseppe Lisanti, Lamberto Ballan, and Alberto Del Bimbo. Context-aware trajectory prediction. In International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) .IEEE, 2018. 2 [6] Stefan Becker, Ronny Hug, Wolfgang Hübner, and Michael Arens. An evaluation of trajectory prediction approaches and notes on the trajnet benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07663 , 2018. 7 [7] Rudy R Bunel, Ilker Turkaslan, Philip Torr, Pushmeet Kohli, and Pawan K Mudigonda. A unified view of piecewise linear neural network verification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 31, 2018. 3 [8] Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H. Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuscenes: A mul-timodal dataset for autonomous driving. Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. 6 [9] Defu Cao, Jiachen Li, Hengbo Ma, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Spectral temporal graph neural network for tra-jectory prediction. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2021. 2 [10] Xiaoyu Cao and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Mitigating evasion attacks to deep neural networks via region-based classifica-tion. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference , pages 278–287, 2017. 3 [11] Yulong Cao, Chaowei Xiao, Anima Anandkumar, Danfei Xu, and Marco Pavone. Advdo: Realistic adversarial attacks for trajectory prediction. In European Conference on Com-puter Vision (ECCV) , pages 36–52. Springer, 2022. 1, 2 [12] Yulong Cao, Danfei Xu, Xinshuo Weng, Zhuoqing Mao, An-ima Anandkumar, Chaowei Xiao, and Marco Pavone. Ro-bust trajectory prediction against adversarial attacks. In Con-ference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , pages 128–137. PMLR, 2023. 1, 2 [13] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten detection methods. In 

Proceedings of the 10th ACM workshop on artificial intelli-gence and security , pages 3–14, 2017. 1 [14] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Krishnamurthy Dj Dvi-jotham, Leslie Rice, Mingjie Sun, and J Zico Kolter. (cer-tified!!) adversarial robustness for free! arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10550 , 2022. 3 [15] Tatjana Chavdarova, Pierre Baqué, Stéphane Bouquet, An-drii Maksai, Cijo Jose, Timur M. Bagautdinov, Louis Lettry, Pascal Fua, Luc Van Gool, and François Fleuret. Wildtrack: A multi-camera hd dataset for dense unscripted pedestrian detection. Prooceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018. 5 [16] Changan Chen, Yuejiang Liu, Sven Kreiss, and Alexandre Alahi. Crowd-Robot Interaction: Crowd-Aware Robot Navi-gation With Attention-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , pages 6015–6022, 2019. ISSN: 2577-087X. 8 [17] Ping-yeh Chiang, Michael Curry, Ahmed Abdelkader, Aounon Kumar, John Dickerson, and Tom Goldstein. De-tection as regression: Certified object detection with median smoothing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (NeurIPS) , 2020. 2, 3 [18] Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized smoothing. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019. 2, 3 [19] Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Robert Stanforth, Sven Gowal, Timothy A Mann, and Pushmeet Kohli. A dual approach to scalable verification of deep networks. In UAI , page 3, 2018. 3[20] Ruediger Ehlers. Formal verification of piece-wise linear feed-forward neural networks. In Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis: 15th International Symposium, ATVA 2017, Pune, India, October 3–6, 2017, Proceedings 15 , pages 269–286. Springer, 2017. 3 [21] Matteo Fischetti and Jason Jo. Deep neural networks and mixed integer linear optimization. Constraints , 23(3):296– 309, 2018. 3 [22] Luca Franco, Leonardo Placidi, Francesco Giuliari, Irtiza Hasan, Marco Cristani, and Fabio Galasso. Under the hood of transformer networks for trajectory forecasting. Pattern Recognition , 138:109372, 2023. 2 [23] Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patash-nik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 , 2022. 3 [24] Roger Girgis, Florian Golemo, Felipe Codevilla, Martin Weiss, Jim Aldon D’Souza, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Felix Heide, and Christopher Pal. Latent variable sequential set transformers for joint multi-agent motion prediction. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2022. 1, 2, 5, 7 [25] Francesco Giuliari, Irtiza Hasan, Marco Cristani, and Fabio Galasso. Transformer networks for trajectory forecasting. In 12309 2020 25th international conference on pattern recognition (ICPR) . IEEE, 2021. 2 [26] Tianpei Gu, Guangyi Chen, Junlong Li, Chunze Lin, Yong-ming Rao, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Stochastic trajectory prediction via motion indeterminacy diffusion. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 17113–17122, 2022. 3 [27] Dirk Helbing and Peter Molnar. Social force model for pedestrian dynamics. Physical Review E , 51, 1998. 5, 7 [28] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-sion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arxiv:2006.11239 ,2020. 3 [29] Xiaowei Huang, Marta Kwiatkowska, Sen Wang, and Min Wu. Safety verification of deep neural networks. In Com-puter Aided Verification: 29th International Conference, CAV 2017, Heidelberg, Germany, July 24-28, 2017, Proceed-ings, Part I 30 , pages 3–29. Springer, 2017. 3 [30] Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning , 110:457–506, 2021. 3 [31] Boris Ivanovic and Marco Pavone. The trajectron: Proba-bilistic multi-agent trajectory modeling with dynamic spa-tiotemporal graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2019. 2 [32] Ruochen Jiao, Xiangguo Liu, Takami Sato, Qi Alfred Chen, and Qi Zhu. Semi-supervised semantics-guided adversarial training for robust trajectory prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 8207–8217, 2023. 1, 2 [33] Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tade-vosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot video generators. 2023. 3[34] Parth Kothari, Sven Kreiss, and Alexandre Alahi. Human trajectory forecasting in crowds: A deep learning perspec-tive. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Sys-tems , 2021. 2, 5, 7 [35] Parth Kothari, Brian Sifringer, and Alexandre Alahi. Inter-pretable social anchors for human trajectory forecasting in crowds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021. 2 [36] Seongju Lee, Junseok Lee, Yeonguk Yu, Taeri Kim, and Ky-oobin Lee. Mart: Multiscale relational transformer networks for multi-agent trajectory prediction. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ECCV) . Springer, 2024. 2 [37] Alon Lerner, Yiorgos Chrysanthou, and Dani Lischinski. Crowds by example. Comput. Graph. Forum , 26, 2007. 5 [38] Xuanqing Liu, Minhao Cheng, Huan Zhang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Towards robust neural networks via random self-ensemble. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 3 [39] Yuejiang Liu, Qi Yan, and Alexandre Alahi. Social nce: Con-trastive learning of socially-aware motion representations. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021. 2 [40] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards deep learn-ing models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 , 2017. 6 [41] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards deep learn-ing models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 , 2017. 3 [42] Weibo Mao, Chenxin Xu, Qi Zhu, Siheng Chen, and Yan-feng Wang. Leapfrog diffusion model for stochastic trajec-tory prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5517– 5526, 2023. 3 [43] Abduallah Mohamed, Kun Qian, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Christian Claudel. Social-stgcnn: A social spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for human trajectory prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 14424–14432, 2020. 2 [44] Nishant Nikhil and Brendan Tran Morris. Convolutional neural network for trajectory prediction. In European Con-ference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops , 2018. 2 [45] Stefano Pellegrini, Andreas Ess, and Luc Van Gool. Improv-ing data association by joint modeling of pedestrian trajec-tories and groupings. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) . Springer, 2010. 5 [46] Lawrence R Rabiner and Bernard Gold. Theory and applica-tion of digital signal processing. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall , 1975. 7 [47] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10684–10695, 2022. 3 [48] Saeed Saadatnejad, Mohammadhossein Bahari, Pedram Khorsandi, Mohammad Saneian, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Alexandre Alahi. Are socially-aware trajec-tory prediction models really socially-aware? arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10879 , 2021. 1, 2 [49] Saeed Saadatnejad, Ali Rasekh, Mohammadreza Mofayezi, Yasamin Medghalchi, Sara Rajabzadeh, Taylor Mordan, and Alexandre Alahi. A generic diffusion-based approach for 3d human pose prediction in the wild. In International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. 3 [50] Saeed Saadatnejad, Yang Gao, Kaouther Messaoud, and Alexandre Alahi. Social-transmotion: Promptable human trajectory prediction. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 1, 2 [51] Hadi Salman, Mingjie Sun, Greg Yang, Ashish Kapoor, and J Zico Kolter. Denoised smoothing: A provable defense for pretrained classifiers. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems (NeurIPS) , 33:21945–21957, 2020. 3, 4 [52] Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(3), 2008. 3 [53] Gagandeep Singh, Timon Gehr, Matthew Mirman, Markus Püschel, and Martin Vechev. Fast and effective robustness 12310 certification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 31, 2018. 3 [54] Kaiyuan Tan, Jun Wang, and Yiannis Kantaros. Targeted ad-versarial attacks against neural network trajectory predictors. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference , pages 431–444. PMLR, 2023. 1, 2 [55] Jonathan Uesato, Brendan O’donoghue, Pushmeet Kohli, and Aaron Oord. Adversarial risk and the dangers of evalu-ating against weak attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . PMLR, 2018. 1 [56] Yixiao Wang, Chen Tang, Lingfeng Sun, Simone Rossi, Yichen Xie, Chensheng Peng, Thomas Hannagan, Stefano Sabatini, Nicola Poerio, Masayoshi Tomizuka, et al. Opti-mizing diffusion models for joint trajectory prediction and controllable generation. In European Conference on Com-puter Vision (ECCV) . Springer, 2024. 3 [57] Norbert Wiener. Extrapolation, interpolation, and smooth-ing of stationary time series: with engineering applications .The MIT press, 1949. 7 [58] Eric Wong and Zico Kolter. Provable defenses against adver-sarial examples via the convex outer adversarial polytope. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,pages 5286–5295. PMLR, 2018. 3 [59] Chenxin Xu, Robby T Tan, Yuhong Tan, Siheng Chen, Yu Guang Wang, Xinchao Wang, and Yanfeng Wang. Eqmo-tion: Equivariant multi-agent motion prediction with invari-ant interaction reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 1, 2, 5, 7 [60] Yihong Xu, Loick Chambon, Mickaël Chen, Alexandre Alahi, Matthieu Cord, Patrick Perez, et al. Towards motion forecasting with real-world perception inputs: Are end-to-end approaches competitive? In International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. 1 [61] Cheng Yang, Lijing Liang, and Zhixun Su. Real-world denoising via diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04457 , 2023. 3 [62] Tianwei Yin, Xingyi Zhou, and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Center-based 3d object detection and tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11784–11793, 2021. 6 [63] Simone Zamboni, Zekarias Tilahun Kefato, Sarunas Girdzi-jauskas, Christoffer Norén, and Laura Dal Col. Pedestrian trajectory prediction with convolutional neural networks. 

Pattern Recognition , 121:108252, 2022. 2 [64] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3836–3847, 2023. 3 [65] Liang Zhang, Nathaniel Xu, Pengfei Yang, Gaojie Jin, Cheng-Chao Huang, and Lijun Zhang. Trajpac: Towards ro-bustness verification of pedestrian trajectory prediction mod-els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 8327–8339, 2023. 2[66] Qingzhao Zhang, Shengtuo Hu, Jiachen Sun, Qi Alfred Chen, and Z Morley Mao. On adversarial robustness of tra-jectory prediction for autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 15159–15168, 2022. 1, 2 [67] Yuanshao Zhu, Yongchao Ye, Shiyao Zhang, Xiangyu Zhao, and James Yu. Difftraj: Generating GPS trajectory with dif-fusion probabilistic model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. 3 [68] Yuanzhi Zhu, Kai Zhang, Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Bi-han Wen, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Denoising dif-fusion models for plug-and-play image restoration. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1219–1229, 2023. 3 12311